

--- PAGE 1 ---
©Ocean Engineering 2024.
ThismanuscriptversionismadeavailableundertheCC-BY-NC-ND4.0
license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
arXiv:2412.07332v1  [cs.RO]  10 Dec 2024


--- PAGE 2 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing
of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat⋆,⋆⋆
Ondřej Procházkaa,∗, Filip Nováka, Tomáš Báčaa, Parakh M. Guptaa, Robert Pěničkaa and
Martin Saskaa
aCzech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czechia
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Model Predictive Control
Unmanned Surface Vehicle
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
Multi-robot Systems
Landing
Harsh environment
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a novel trajectory generation method based on Model Predictive Control (MPC)
foragilelandingofanUnmannedAerialVehicle(UAV)ontoanUnmannedSurfaceVehicle(USV)’s
deckinharshconditions.ThetrajectorygenerationexploitsthestatepredictionsoftheUSVtocreate
periodicallyupdatedtrajectoriesforamultirotorUAVtopreciselylandonthedeckofamovingUSV
evenincaseswherethedeck’sinclinationiscontinuouslychanging.WeuseanMPC-basedschemeto
createtrajectoriesthatconsiderboththeUAVdynamicsandthepredictedstatesoftheUSVuptothe
firstderivativeofpositionandorientation.Comparedtoexistingapproaches,ourmethoddynamically
modifies the penalization matrices to precisely follow the corresponding states with respect to the
flightphase.Especiallyduringthelandingmaneuver,theUAVsynchronizesattitudewiththeUSV’s,
allowing for fast landing on a tilted deck. Simulations show the method’s reliability in various sea
conditions up to Rough sea (wave height 4 m), outperforming state-of-the-art methods in landing
speed and accuracy, with twice the precision on average. Finally, real-world experiments validate
the simulation results, demonstrating robust landings on a moving USV, while all computations are
performed in real-time onboard the UAV.
1. INTRODUCTION
There has been a significant increase in the utilization
of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) in various domains
in recent years, including tasks above water surfaces. UAVs
have proven beneficial in marine wildlife monitoring For-
tuna,Ferreira,Gomes,FerreiraandSousa(2013);Yang,Yu,
Dedman, Rosso, Zhu, Yang, Xia, Tian, Zhang and Wang
(2022), search and rescue operations Doherty and Rudol
(2007),andoffshoresafetymonitoringtoidentifyswimmers
in distress Sharma, Saqib, Scully-Power and Blumenstein
(2022). Moreover, UAVs can be deployed to detect garbage
on the water surface Li, Huang, Wang, Yuan, Liu and Xu
(2022). Individual garbage pieces can be then picked up
by the drone itself, or its position can be shared from the
UAVtotheUnmannedSurfaceVehicle(USV)forcollection
Akib,Tasnim,Biswas,Hashem,Rahman,Bhattacharjeeand
Fattah (2019). As it is clear, not only, from the afore-
mentioned literature, the UAVs are a valuable resource for
operations and study of maritime environments. However,
their limited operation time necessitates a carrier ship to
transport the UAV to the mission location for takeoff and
⋆
ThisworkhasbeensupportedbytheTechnologyInnovationInstitute
- Sole Proprietorship LLC, UAE, under the Research Project Contract
No.TII/ARRC/2055/2021,CTUgrantnoSGS23/177/OHK3/3T/13andthe
CzechScienceFoundation(GAČR)underresearchprojectNo.23-06162M.
⋆⋆
Multimedia materials: https://mrs.fel.cvut.cz/index.php?option=
com_content&view=article&id=246
∗Corresponding author
prochon4@fel.cvut.cz (O. Procházka)
https://mrs.fel.cvut.cz/members/phdstudents/ondrej-prochazka
(O. Procházka)
ORCID(s): 0009-0009-2224-750X(O. Procházka);0000-0003-3826-5904
(F. Novák);0000-0001-9649-8277 (T. Báča);0000-0002-6481-2281(P.M.
Gupta); 0000-0001-8549-4932(R.Pěnička);0000-0001-7106-3816(M.Saska)
(a)
(b)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1: Motivation (a) manual landing of the UAV in the real
world DailyPicksandFlicks (2016), (b) autonomous landing of
the UAV in simulation in the high wave environment, and (c)
photo of the UAV together with the USV research platform
deployed in the real world.
landing in the vicinity of a mission area. The carrier ship
brings the additional advantage of having better payload
capacity and energy storage, and thus, can also be used
to recharge the UAV Junaid, Konoiko, Zweiri, Sahinkaya
and Seneviratne (2017). To maintain mission efficiency and
eliminatetheneedforhumanintervention,thelandingneeds
to be autonomous, which is challenging due to the severe
conditions in a maritime environment. It is estimated that
the probability of witnessing waves with a height of half
a meter or more is approximately90 % worldwide Fossen
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 2 of 18


--- PAGE 3 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat
(2011). Waves affect ship’s position, altitude, attitude, and
velocity such that the USV is sliding, tilting, and heaving
simultaneously, making UAV landings challenging, espe-
ciallyonsmallUSVs,preventingtheuseofstandardlanding
maneuvers. Available mission time is further diminished by
thetimerequiredforavisualsearchoftheUSVforlanding,
and additionally, for a collaborative mission (e.g. collab-
orative object manipulation on the water surface Novák,
Báča and Saska (2024)), it is reasonable to assume that
communication exists between the two vehicles. Therefore,
thiscommunicationlinkisusedtoalsosharethepositionof
the USV, allowing for a direct and time-efficient approach
to the location of the USV. At the same time, we aim to
shorten the landing maneuver itself as much as possible.
Whilepossiblydangerousinharshseaconditions,thedirect
returntoUSVandtheagilelandingcansignificantlyprolong
the time for the main mission objectives.
This paper introduces a novel approach that enables
UAVs to land autonomously on a moving or rocking USV
in harsh environments utilizing a Model Predictive Con-
trol (MPC)-based trajectory generation in the process. This
removes human intervention (see Figure 1) and increases
the safety and reliability of the UAV’s usage on the high
seas. The proposed method relies on accurate estimation
and prediction of USV’s states, including position, rota-
tion, and their first derivative, which are obtained from
multiple sources to allow for landing in low visibility or
harsh sea conditions Novak, Baca, Prochazka and Saska
(2024).Incontrasttoourapproach,mostofthestate-of-the-
art methods Xu, Hu, Liu, Wang and Zhang (2020); Abu-
joub (2019); Venugopalan, Taher and Barbastathis (2012);
Polvara, Sharma, Wan, Manning and Sutton (2018); Keller
and Ben-Moshe (2022); Persson and Wahlberg (2019) rely
on simplified models of the USV, which does not guarantee
precise estimation of the USV’s states. Consequently, land-
ingaccuracyinharshenvironmentscannotbeassureddueto
the missing information about the USV’s movement, which
could result in an unsafe procedure or even a crash. To this
end,ourtrajectorygeneratorincorporatessignificantlymore
information about the USV state that is available during
the individual phases of the UAV’s operation and adjusts
penalization matrices’ values that prioritize specific states
for tracking. The information about roll, pitch, yaw, linear
movements,andEulerratesistakenintoaccounttoincrease
precision and reduce the harshness of the touchdown. This
enablesasignificantincreaseintheperformanceoflandings
invariousseaconditionsandevenonaninclinedUSVdeck.
The simulation results demonstrate the proposed sys-
tem’s reliable performance in landing the UAV on a small
scale USV under Moderate sea and even Rough sea con-
ditions in which the height of the waves reaches up to
4 m. The system underwent extensive testing in more than
1,000simulationexperimentsandwascomparedtothelatest
state-of-the-art work Gupta, Pairet, Nascimento and Saska
(2022).Weshowapproximatelytwotimesbettertouchdown
accuracywitha 50 %fasterlandingmaneuveronaverage.It
isworthmentioningthatourmethodachievedasuccessrate
of 100 % in most tested environment setups of the different
seaconditions,withonlytwoparticularlychallengingsetups
showing a slightly lower success rate, resulting in aborted
and repeated landing. Moreover, the system was repeatedly
tested in a real-world environment where its robustness and
performance indicated in simulations were confirmed.
2. RELATED WORKS
Landing on a rocking and heaving platform, especially
on a marine vessel in bad weather conditions, is a very
challengingmaneuverinwhichthehelicoptercancrashinto
the vessel or fall from the deck into the water. Even highly
trained military pilots have difficulty with such a maneuver
andthusrelyonthevisualizationofhorizonreferenceStingl
(1970) or use beartrap for a safer landing. Since it is im-
possible to use beartrap for small UAVs, the authors in Xu,
Liu, Cao, Wang and Qian (2024) proposed a manipulator-
assisted landing system that captures the hovering UAVs
using the tethered connection. The landing is done on a
USV’s motion compensation platform, which is unlike the
platform mentioned in the work of Tian, Li, Liao and Cao
(2024) capable of compensating pitch and roll motions of
the USV. The presented systems require a multiple-joint
manipulator placed on the USV, and even so, for the UAV’s
position control, visual servoing feedback is used.
The visual servoing approaches can be divided into
two categories: Position-Based visual servoing (PBVS) and
Image-Based Visual Servoing (IBVS) Yang, Liu, Wang,
Wang, Hu and Xi (2021). The PBVS method works in
Cartesian space, whereas the IBVS approach works directly
with the image input from sensors. The IBVS suffers from
camera calibration errors, although the PBVS may suffer
from position estimation errors. Moreover, it is noteworthy
that the IBVS method Yang et al. (2021) assumes that the
UAV’sattitudechangesaresmall,andcanthusbeneglected.
Furthermore, the IBVS method uses a prediction of the
landing zone for smoother control by using a Kalman filter
Kalman(1960).ThesolutiondescribedinYangetal.(2021)
was tested on a simulated USV deck in the real world,
proving that the UAV can detect and land on a tilting deck.
Also, the dynamic landing algorithm presented in Ding and
Huang (2023), which enables landing on the heaving USV,
was tested in real-world scenarios. However, the authors
do not present the roll and pitch tracking results upon the
touchdown when USV is rocking.
The PBVS based on Proportional-Integral-Derivative
(PID) controller introduced in Xu et al. (2020) was used
for vision-based autonomous landing on a boat where an
AprilTagOlson(2011)wasplacedonthehelipad.Thevisual
slidelandingissuitableinasituationwhereitisnotpossible
to hover above the helipad and perform a regular landing
because of sails or cables Keller and Ben-Moshe (2022).
Another work demonstrating the capability of landing on a
one-direction fast-moving platform is presented in Zhang,
Wu and Wei (2024). These landing approaches mostly do
not model the USV’s roll, pitch, and heave motions.
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 3 of 18


--- PAGE 4 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat
The aforementioned visual-based approaches do not
work well in limited lighting conditions. To enable landing
at night, the marine vessel’s deck can be equipped with
infrared markers Meng, Wang, Han and Ban (2019) that are
used to navigate fixed-wing aircraft to the runway during
autonomous landing.Other approachesequip theUAV with
Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) sensors Abujoub,
McPhee and Irani (2020); Abujoub, McPhee, Westin and
Irani (2018). LiDAR can detect the vessel’s movements and
use it for the Signal Prediction Algorithm (SPA) Abujoub
et al. (2018). This algorithm includes mode detection, es-
timation, and prediction using Fast Fourier Transformation
to identify the frequency, amplitude, and phase of the roll
and pitch movements. Another approach that can determine
a proper time for landing is based on estimating the ship’s
energy using Landing Period Indicator (LPI), where the
pertinent motions are roll, pitch, and heave Abujoub et al.
(2020).Regardingtheverticaloscillations,theActiveHeave
Compensation (AHC) algorithm is proposed in the same
paper Abujoub et al. (2020). The approach of the AHC
algorithm is to stabilize the UAV over the deck to ensure a
landing that considers the raising and lowering of the deck.
Therefore, it can be used together with SPA or LPI.
The drawback of the methods mentioned above is that
they are purely vision-based. As such, if the vessel is not in
the Field of View (FOV) of the UAV’s sensors, the global
position of the USV is unknown. The UAV must find the
USV by searching the area, which is an energy-consuming
procedure. Furthermore, it is anticipated that cooperation
between the UAV and USV will be required for certain
missiontasks,andthereforetheUSVisexpectedtobeinthe
vicinityoftheUAV.Awirelesscommunicationbetweenthe
UAVandtheUSVforsharingtheglobalpositionoftheUSV
is presented in Venugopalan et al. (2012); Paris, Lopez and
How (2020). Nevertheless, it is shown that the Global Nav-
igation Satellite System (GNSS) precision is not sufficient
for small UAVs and mainly for the altitude estimation. Due
to the potential unreliability and imprecision of GNSS, we
rely on a method that combines UAV onboard vision-based
sensors with USV onboard sensors to accurately estimate
the states of the USV Novak et al. (2024). The method
proposedinNovaketal.(2024)utilizesdatafromtheUSV’s
GNSSforaroughestimationofitslocationandincorporates
visualrelativelocalizationsystemUltraVioletDirectionAnd
Ranging (UVDAR) Walter, Saska and Franchi (2018) and
visual fiducial system AprilTag Wang and Olson (2016).
Thanks to the UVDAR system, localization of the USV
can be done even in reduced visibility conditions, such as
evening or night. To enhance the precision of the USV’s
orientationandangularrateestimationandpredictionduring
the landing maneuver, data from the USV’s Inertial Mea-
surement Unit (IMU) is used.
To increase the precision of the UAV’s control algo-
rithm, the PID controller is nowadays being replaced by a
method referred to as MPC. This is also known as receding
horizon control or moving horizon control García, Prett and
Morari (1989); Rawlings (2000). In Ngo and Sultan (2014),
Table 1
Comparison of the aspects of landing approaches for the
vessels in related research works.
Work Dp1 Al2 Hc3 6-DOFs
USV model
Real-world
deployment
(1) ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓
(2) ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
(3) ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
(4) ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
(5) ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
(6) ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓
(7) ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
(8) ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓
(9) ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓
(10) ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
(11) ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
This work ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
- (1) Venugopalan et al. (2012), (2) Ngo and Sultan
(2014), (3) Polvara et al. (2018), (4) Persson and
Wahlberg(2019),(5)Abujoubetal.(2020),(6)Xuetal.
(2020),(7)Yangetal.(2021),(8)Keller andBen-Moshe
(2022), (9) Gupta et al. (2022), (10) Ding and Huang
(2023), (11) Stephenson, Duncan and Greeff (2024)
1 Dynamic adjustments of the penalization matrices to
achieve better tracking of the individual USV’s states
during the flight and especially during the final touch-
down.
2 UAV aligns its position and orientation up to the first
derivative with USV’s upon touchdown.
3 Heave motion compensation.
nonlinearMPCisusedtocontrolthelandingofahelicopter
on a navy vessel based on a prediction of the quiescent
periods, which is made based on long-term observation of
the USV’s movements. This system was outperformed by
methods presented in Gupta et al. (2022); Stephenson et al.
(2024). Both methods use the same approach for a landing
procedure, waiting for a low tilt of the USV. The landing
maneuverisperformedbasedonthedefinedinternallanding
cost function incorporated into the MPC, which penalizes
theUSV’srockingmovements.BothNgoandSultan(2014);
Gupta et al. (2022) landing approaches may require a long
time for safe landing. Considering the limited flight time
of UAVs, it is crucial to optimize the landing maneuver
and shorten the overall return-to-home procedure. Thus, the
maximumflighttimecanbeusedfortheUAV’sprimarytask
(e.g., off-shore infrastructure inspection, oil spill monitor-
ing, marine life tracking, and vessel inspection). However,
theseapproachesNgoandSultan(2014);Guptaetal.(2022)
need to wait for the USV’s deck to be fully leveled or for
calmness in wave motion, assuming that the surge and sway
motions of the USV are negligible.
In the proposed approach, the UAV compensates the
USV’s attitude by synchronizing the UAV’s attitude with
the USV’s, allowing for fast landing on a tilted deck. Fur-
thermore, USV model, which is used, includes wave mod-
eling that we introduced in Novak et al. (2024), contrasting
withthestate-of-the-artapproaches,wheresuchinformation
is not considered. The model of the waves is crucial for
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 4 of 18


--- PAGE 5 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat
heavemotionestimationReis,Batista,OliveiraandSilvestre
(2023) and prediction. Such possible heave compensation
integrated in the landing technique ensures low impact ve-
locity during touchdown. These features make it usable
in varying sea conditions and more efficient for safe and
fast mission completion, even onRough sea. A comparison
summary of our proposed system with existing state-of-
the-art approaches is shown in Table 1. According to this
table, many works utilize the full 6 degrees of freedom
(DOFs) USV model, heave motion compensation, and take
intoaccountUSV’sattitudeangles.Whilemanyapproaches
have been tested in real-world scenarios, none incorporate
dynamic penalization matrices adjustments to better track
the USV’s individual states during the final touchdown.
3. VEHICLES’ MODELS
This section introduces the mathematical model and
physics background of our work. The mathematical model
of the USV serves as the basis for estimating and predicting
USV’s states. This section further comprises the derivation
of the UAV’s mathematical model, which is crucial for the
subsequent MPC-based trajectory generation. To be able to
describe the models, let us define the local East North Up
(ENU) coordinate frame together with the UAV’s body
coordinate frame () and USV’s coordinate frame () as
shown in Figure 2.
The precise modeling of the USV is crucial for accurate
estimation and prediction of its states, which are essential
conditionsfordesigningasafeandaccuratelandingmaneu-
ver.Forthispurpose,the6DOFmodeloftheUSVutilizedin
W ˆ e2 ˆ e1
ˆ e3
B
ˆby
ˆbx
ˆbz
qb
pb
rb
pc
qc
rc
ˆ cy
ˆ cx
ˆ cz
C
tc
w, Rc
w
tb
w, Rb
w
Figure 2: Illustration of the UAV’s and USV’s coordinate
systems, where  represents local ENU frame, denotes the
multirotor’s body-fixed frame, and symbolizes the USV’s
body-fixed frame. The rotation matrix from the world frame
to the USV’s body-fixed frame is represented as𝐑𝑏
𝑤, and the
translation vector is denoted as 𝐭𝑏
𝑤. The rotation matrix 𝐑𝑐
𝑤
and translation vector𝐭𝑐
𝑤 denotes rotation and translation from
the world frame to the UAV’s body-fixed frame. The angular
velocity of the UAV and USV is denoted with(𝑝, 𝑞, 𝑟) with the
appropriate subscripts.
this work is composed of the standard Fossen’s USV model
Fossen (2002) and model of the waves as is proposed in
Novak et al. (2024). According to Novak et al. (2024), the
general definition of the USV model looks as follows
̇𝜼𝐿 = 𝝂, (1)
̇𝝂 = −𝐌−1(𝐃𝝂 + 𝐆𝜼𝐿) + 𝐂wave,𝝂𝐱wave,𝜈, (2)
̇𝐱wave,𝜈 = 𝐀wave,𝝂𝐱wave,𝜈, (3)
where 𝜼𝐿 = [ ̂𝑏𝑥, ̂𝑏𝑦, ̂𝑏𝑧, 𝜙𝑏, 𝜃𝑏, 𝜓𝑏]⊤ ∈ ℝ3 ×  3 is a vector
composedofpositionsandorientationsin Vessel parallel co-
ordinate system Fossen (2011). Euler angles are𝜙𝑏, 𝜃𝑏, and
𝜓𝑏, 𝝂 = [𝑢𝑏, 𝑣𝑏, 𝑤𝑏, 𝑝𝑏, 𝑞𝑏, 𝑟𝑏]⊤ ∈ ℝ6isavectorthatcontains
the linear and angular speeds for all axes. 𝐆 represents
matrixofgravitationalandbuoyancyforces, 𝐃describesthe
system’sdamping,𝐌 = 𝐌𝑅𝐵 + 𝐌𝐴 isasumoftheUSV’s
bodyinertiamatrixandhydrodynamicsinertiamatrix.State-
space representation matrix of the waves’ damping and
frequency is denoted with 𝐀wave,𝝂. Matrix 𝐂𝑤𝑎𝑣𝑒,𝜈 is the
diagonaloutputmatrixofthesize,whichcorrespondstothe
numberofmodeledwaves,and 𝐱wave,𝜈 isthestatevector,in-
cludingallstatesoftheindividualwavescomponents.Notice
themodel(1)–(3)isusedsolelyforUSVstateestimationand
prediction onboard the UAV, maintaining precision even in
challengingconditionswithoutrelyingoninputslikerudder
andpropellers,whichwouldreducerobustnessbyincreasing
reliance on communication stability.
Based on the already formulated USV’s model, the full
nonlinearmodeloftheUAVisdefinedasarigidbodymodel
in three-dimensional space. Generalized positions (4) and
velocities (5) are designated as
𝜼𝑐 = [𝜼⊺
𝑝𝑐
, 𝜼⊺
𝑜𝑐
]⊤ = [ ̂ 𝑐𝑥, ̂ 𝑐𝑦, ̂ 𝑐𝑧, 𝜙𝑐, 𝜃𝑐, 𝜓𝑐]⊤ ∈ ℝ3 ×  3, (4)
𝝊𝑐 = [𝝊⊺
𝑙 , 𝝊⊺
𝑎]⊤ = [𝑣𝑥, 𝑣𝑦, 𝑣𝑧, 𝑣𝜙, 𝑣𝜃, 𝑣𝜓 ]⊤ ∈ ℝ6, (5)
where vector 𝜼𝑐 is composed of position𝜼𝑝𝑐 = [ ̂ 𝑐𝑥, ̂ 𝑐𝑦, ̂ 𝑐𝑧]⊤ and
orientation 𝜼𝑜 = [ 𝜙𝑐, 𝜃𝑐, 𝜓𝑐]⊤. The Euler angles are described
in intrinsic zyx-convention. The vector𝝊𝑐 includes linear velocity
𝝊𝑙 = [ 𝑣𝑥, 𝑣𝑦, 𝑣𝑧]⊤andtheEulerratevector 𝝊𝑎 = [ 𝑣𝜙, 𝑣𝜃, 𝑣𝜓 ]⊤.The
position 𝜼𝑐 andvelocity 𝝊𝑐 aredefinedinthelocalENUcoordinate
frame .
The translational dynamics of the UAV is defined as
̇𝜼𝑝𝑐 = 𝝊𝑙, (6)
̈𝜼𝑝𝑐 = −𝑔 ̂𝐞3 + 𝐑𝑤
𝑐
𝐓𝐂
𝑚 , (7)
where 𝑔 denotes gravitation acceleration, ̂𝐞3 is an element of
the standard basis, and 𝑚 is the quadcopter weight. The𝐑𝑤
𝑐 is
an intrinsic xyz-convention Euler rotation matrix. The total force
(thrust) 𝐓𝐂 is generated in the body-fixed frame as
𝐓𝐂 = [
0 0 𝑘𝑇
∑4
𝑖=1 𝜔2
𝑖
]⊤
, (8)
where 𝑘𝑇 isaliftconstantforamotorwithapropellerand 𝜔𝑖 isthe
rotor’s angular velocity. The angular dynamics in local coordinate
frame  are defined as
̇𝜼𝑜𝑐 = 𝝊𝑎, (9)
̈𝜼𝑜𝑐 = (𝐓𝑤
𝑐 𝐈𝑐𝐓𝑐
𝑤)−1 (𝝉𝑪 − 𝐂𝐭 ̇𝜼𝑜𝑐
), (10)
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 5 of 18


--- PAGE 6 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat
where 𝐂𝐭 is the Coriolis term, which contains centripetal and
gyroscopicterms,asshowninRaffo,OrtegaandRubio(2010).The
𝝉𝑪 standsforthetotaltorquegeneratedbytherotorsand 𝐈𝑐 ∈ ℝ3𝑥3
is an inertial matrix composed of𝐼𝑥𝑥, 𝐼𝑦𝑦, 𝐼𝑧𝑧 on its diagonal. As
shown in Jalón (2014), the transformation matrix𝐓𝑐
𝑤 = (𝐓𝑤
𝑐 )⊤ is
defined as
𝐓𝑐
𝑤 = 𝐑⊺
𝑥,𝜙𝑐
𝐑⊺
𝑦,𝜃𝑐
𝐑⊺
𝑧,𝜓𝑐
̂𝐞𝟑 + 𝐑⊺
𝑥,𝜙𝑐
𝐑⊺
𝑦,𝜃𝑐
̂𝐞𝟐 + 𝐑⊺
𝑥,𝜙𝑐
̂𝐞𝟏, (11)
where ̂𝐞1, ̂𝐞2, ̂𝐞3 are elements of thestandard basis. It is also worth
mentioningthattheinversion 𝐓𝑤
𝑐 of 𝐓𝑐
𝑤 from(11)isnotdefinedfor
𝜃𝑐 = 𝜋
2 + 𝑗𝜋, 𝑗 ∈ ℤ.
In order to provide the linear approximation of the equations
ofmotionthatwereshownin(6),(7),(9),and(10),anequilibrium
point is needed da Cunha (2015). We consider as equilibrium the
hovering state of the UAV, which is defined as a state with zero
derivatives of position. Thus, the linearized solution is introduced
as
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
̇𝜼𝑝𝑐
̇𝜼𝑜𝑐
̈𝜼𝑝𝑐
̈𝜼𝑜𝑐
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
=
[𝟎6×3 𝟎6×3 𝐈6×6
𝟎6×3 𝐀𝐩 𝟎6×6
]
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐀𝐜
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
𝜼𝑝𝑐
𝜼𝑜𝑐
̇𝜼𝑝𝑐
̇𝜼𝑜𝑐
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
+
[𝟎8×4
𝐁𝐩
]
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝐁𝐜
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
𝜔2
1
𝜔2
2
𝜔2
3
𝜔2
4
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
, (12)
where 𝐀𝐩 is a sparse matrix which contains nonzero elements
located at specific positions as follows
𝐀𝐩
[1,2] =
𝑘𝑇 (𝜔2
ℎ1
+ 𝜔2
ℎ2
+ 𝜔2
ℎ3
+ 𝜔2
ℎ4
)
𝑚 , (13)
𝐀𝐩
[2,1] =
−𝑘𝑇 (𝜔2
ℎ1
+ 𝜔2
ℎ2
+ 𝜔2
ℎ3
+ 𝜔2
ℎ4
)
𝑚 , (14)
𝐀𝐩
[4,2] =
−𝑏 (𝜔2
ℎ1
− 𝜔2
ℎ2
+ 𝜔2
ℎ3
− 𝜔2
ℎ4
)
𝐼𝑧𝑧
, (15)
𝐀𝐩
[5,1] =
(𝐼𝑦𝑦 𝑏 − 𝐼𝑧𝑧 𝑏 )(𝜔2
ℎ1
− 𝜔2
ℎ2
+ 𝜔2
ℎ3
− 𝜔2
ℎ4
)
𝐼𝑦𝑦 𝐼𝑧𝑧
, (16)
𝐀𝐩
[6,1] =
(𝐼𝑦𝑦 𝑘𝑇 𝑙 − 𝐼𝑧𝑧 𝑘𝑇 𝑙 )(𝜔2
ℎ1
− 𝜔2
ℎ2
− 𝜔2
ℎ3
+ 𝜔2
ℎ4
)
𝐼𝑦𝑦 𝐼𝑧𝑧
,
(17)
𝐀𝐩
[6,2] =
−𝐼𝑦𝑦 𝑘𝑇 𝑙 (𝜔2
ℎ1
+ 𝜔2
ℎ2
− 𝜔2
ℎ3
− 𝜔2
ℎ4
)
𝐼𝑦𝑦 𝐼𝑧𝑧
, (18)
where 𝑏 is the drag constant of the motor with a propeller. Matrix
𝐁𝐩 is defined as
𝐁𝐩 =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
𝑘𝑇
𝑚
𝑘𝑇
𝑚
𝑘𝑇
𝑚
𝑘𝑇
𝑚
−𝑘𝑇 𝑙
𝐼𝑥𝑥
−𝑘𝑇 𝑙
𝐼𝑥𝑥
𝑘𝑇 𝑙
𝐼𝑥𝑥
𝑘𝑇 𝑙
𝐼𝑥𝑥
−𝑘𝑇 𝑙
𝐼𝑦𝑦
𝑘𝑇 𝑙
𝐼𝑦𝑦
𝑘𝑇 𝑙
𝐼𝑦𝑦
−𝑘𝑇 𝑙
𝐼𝑦𝑦
−𝑏
𝐼𝑧𝑧
𝑏
𝐼𝑧𝑧
−𝑏
𝐼𝑧𝑧
𝑏
𝐼𝑧𝑧
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
. (19)
We assume a symmetric X-shape of the UAV with arm length𝑙.
Variable 𝜔ℎ𝑖 istherotor’sangularvelocityinhover,whichisequal
to
𝑘𝑇
4∑
𝑖=1
𝜔2
ℎ𝑖
= 𝑚𝑔. (20)
Thanks to the linearized model of the UAV, it is possible to
utilize linear MPC in the trajectory generation process, which is
challengingduetothelimitationsofonboardcomputationalpower
for searching the large solution space.
4. MPC-BASED LANDING TRAJECTORY
GENERATION
Inthissection,weintroducetheMPC-basedtrajectorygenera-
tor designed specifically for landing a UAV on the tilting deck of a
movingUSV.Firstly,thederivationoftheusedMPCisdetailedin
Subsection4.1.ItisfollowedbySubsection4.2wherethestatema-
chineresponsiblefordeterminingthedistinctflightmissionphases,
inwhichtheUAVoperates,isintroduced.Thesestagesofflightare
used for MPC-based trajectory generator, which ensures that the
generated trajectory will correspond to the specified flight stage
e.g. approaching or landing maneuver. This assumption enables
dynamically adjusting the defined problem during the process of
trajectory generation both in terms of modifying MPC’s objective
and or its reference. Such a process is explained in Subsection 4.3.
4.1. Model Predictive Control
In general (see Rawlings (2000)), the objective function of the
MPC in the tracking form is defined as
min
𝐞, 𝐮
𝐽 (𝐞, 𝐮) = 1
2 𝐞⊺
[𝑡+𝑁]𝐏𝐞[𝑡+𝑁]+
1
2
𝑁−1∑
𝑘=1
(
𝐞⊺
[𝑡+𝑘]𝐐𝐞[𝑡+𝑘] + 𝐮⊺
[𝑡+𝑘]𝐑𝐮[𝑡+𝑘]
)
,
(21)
where 𝑘 = {1, … , 𝑁 − 1}and 𝑁 ∈ ℤ+ isthesizeoftheprediction
and control horizon simultaneously,𝑡 stands for the current time,
and 𝐞[𝑡+𝑘] denotes the error between the USV’s states𝐫[𝑡+𝑘] and
the observable UAV’s states𝐲[𝑡+𝑘]. Both UAV and USV models
were described in Section 3. The penalization matrices𝐐 and 𝐏
are diagonal positive semi-definite matrices. Usually, optimization
problemsareassumedtobetime-invariant,eliminatingtheneedfor
parameter modifications. However, in our case, it is highly benefi-
cial to adjust the parameters of the matrix𝐐 based on the actual
state of the flight, and therefore, from now onward we will assume
the matrix to be𝐐 time varying 𝐐[𝐭]. For example, if the UAV is
followingtheUSV,thepenalizationoftheUAV’sandUSV’slinear
velocity difference is increased. A detailed description is provided
in the following sections. The weighting matrix𝐑 is a diagonal
positive-definite matrix that penalizes input signals 𝐮 in every
controlstep,wherebythisinputcorrespondstoavectorcontaining
thesquareofeachrotor’sindividualangularvelocities.TheUAV’s
model (12), initial state, and both state and input constraints are
defined as
𝐱[𝑡+𝑘+1] = 𝐀𝐱[𝑡+𝑘] + 𝐁𝐮[𝑡+𝑘] ∀𝑘 ∈ {0, … , 𝑁 − 1}, (22)
𝐱[𝑡] = measured current state, (23)
𝐱min ≤ 𝐱[𝑡+𝑘] ≤ 𝐱max ∀𝑘 ∈ {1, … , 𝑁}, (24)
𝐮min ≤ 𝐮[𝑡+𝑘] ≤ 𝐮max ∀𝑘 ∈ {1, … , 𝑁}. (25)
AssumingasteadystateoftheUAVinhoverandhavingatracking
error close to zero, it is not possible to have a control input equal
to zero. The objective function (21) tries to optimize the control
inputtoreduceboththetrackingerrorandtheinputitselfduringthe
optimizationprocess,butitisnotawarethattheinputshouldnotbe
anonzerovalue.Thisapproachcanincreasethedeviationbetween
the desired and actual state, thus increasing the reference error.
Therefore, the standard objective function (21) is reformulated.
Instead of using the input signal𝐮[𝑡+𝑘] itself, its increment is used:
Δ𝐮[𝑡] = 𝐮[𝑡] − 𝐮[𝑡−1]. (26)
This leads to the reformulation of a linear model, which must be
augmented with the new state variable𝐱𝑢[𝑡−1] ≅ 𝐮[𝑡−1] and the
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 6 of 18


--- PAGE 7 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat
control input is exchanged forΔ𝐮[𝑡]. The form of the augmented
model is
[𝐱[𝑡+1]
𝐱𝑢[𝑡+1]
]
=
[ 𝐀 𝐁
𝟎𝑚×𝑛 𝐈𝑚×𝑚
]
⏟ ⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞ ⏟ ⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞ ⏟
𝐀𝑎
[𝐱[𝑡]
𝐱𝑢[𝑡]
]
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝐱𝑎[𝑡]
+
[ 𝐁
𝐈𝑚×𝑚
]
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝐁𝑎
Δ𝐮[𝑡], (27)
𝐲[𝑡] = [𝐂 𝟎 𝑝×𝑚]
⏟ ⏞⏞⏞ ⏟ ⏞⏞⏞ ⏟
𝐂𝑎
[𝐱[𝑡]
𝐱𝑢[𝑡]
]
, (28)
where 𝐱 ∈ ℝ𝑛 is a state vector containing𝑛 states, 𝐮 ∈ ℝ𝑚 is the
controlvectorwith 𝑚inputs,and 𝐲 ∈ ℝ𝑝 isasystemoutputvector.
Itisalsoassumedthattheprimarymodelomitsdirectfeed-through
of the input signal.
The objective function in its sequential form, incorporating an
augmentedmodel(27)–(28),andexcludingconstantterms(offsets
thatcanbeomittedwithoutaffectingthegeneralityoftheobjective
function) is derived by substituting𝐞[𝑡] with 𝐫[𝑡] − 𝐂𝑎𝐱𝑎[𝑡] into (21)
resulting in
min
Δ𝐮
𝐽 (Δ𝐮, 𝐱[𝑡], 𝐐[𝑡]) = 1
2 Δ𝐮⊺( ̄𝐂⊺
𝑎
̄𝐐[𝑡] ̄𝐂𝑎 + ̄𝐑)Δ𝐮+
[𝐱⊺
[𝑡] 𝐮⊺
[𝑡−1] 𝐫⊺
[𝑡]
][̄𝐀⊺
𝑎
̄𝐐[𝑡] ̄𝐂𝑎
− ̄𝐓 ̄𝐂𝑎
]⊺
Δ𝐮.
(29)
Matrix ̄𝐂𝑎 denotes the controllability matrix of the augmented
modeloftheUAV.Matrix ̄𝐀𝑎isacolumnmatrixofthe 𝐀𝑎matrices
of the length of the prediction horizon. Matrices ̄𝐐, ̄𝐓 and ̄𝐑
wereobtainedfromasimplifiedsimultaneousformoftheobjective
function (21).
Since the objective function is introduced in sequential form,
the constraints for the states are defined as
̄𝐂𝑎Δ𝐮 ≤ 𝐱max − ̄𝐀𝑎𝐱𝑎[𝑡], (30)
where 𝐱max ∈ ℝ(𝑛+𝑚)𝑁 arelimitingvaluesoftheUAVstate.Thiscan
bedoneaccordinglyforthelowerbound.Also,slewrateconstraints
are added, which refer to the range of change of an input variable
and are defined as
Δ𝐮[𝑡] ≤ Δ𝐮max, (31)
−Δ𝐮[𝑡] ≤ −Δ𝐮min, (32)
where Δ𝐮max ∈ ℝ(𝑚,𝑁)isavectorofthechangeofangularspeedfor
individual propellers. The low-level formulation (29) allows us to
use the whole linear model of the UAV and track position, attitude
angles, linear velocities, and Euler rates while still being able to
compute the problem in real-time. However, not all stages of the
flightmissionnecessitatetrackingallUSVstates.Theforthcoming
section introduces the mission and navigation state machine to
address this aspect.
4.2. Mission and navigation
The UAV flight phases before landing are controlled by the
finite state machine that actively changes what are the reference
states for the MPC-based trajectory planning. The proposed state
machine is designed tosegment the operational mission, assuming
the landing trajectory generator can initiate from any location near
the USV, into several logical phases of flight. This segmentation
aimstoensuresafetyandstreamlinetheoverallmissionexecution.
We consider the UAV landing procedure to have three phases:
NAVIGATION, FOLLOW, and LANDING. Individual phases are
further divided into states, which are explained in the following
paragraph and shown in Figure 3.
Getaltitude altitudereached Approach
USVvisible
UAV stableaboveTracking
UAVready Idle start
Trackingstable
landingconditions
flareheightDescent Flare
touchdownLanded
YES NO
YES
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES
NO
YES
NO
YES
YES
NO
NAVIGATION
FOLLOW
LANDING
Figure 3: Illustration of the developed state machine composed
of three phases ensures decision-making throughout the whole
process.
1. The initial state isIdle. The UAV remains in this state until
the landing command is initiated. If the UAV is flying and
acquiring the USV’s position using wireless communica-
tion, the state machine passes to the NAVIGATION phase.
2. NAVIGATION phase is composed of Get altitude and
Approachstates.
(a) In Get altitude state the UAV ascents or descents to
a certain approach altitude.
(b) Then, the state machine transitions into theApproach
state where the UAV’s objective is to move to the
USV’s location, which is know thanks to the GNSS
system and mutual communication. The UAV oper-
ates in this state up to the confirmation of visual con-
tactoftheUSVwhentheUSV’sstatepredictionstarts
using visual relative localization systems instead of
using GNSS, which can suffer from drifts. At that
moment, the state machine passes to the next phase.
3. FOLLOW phase is composed of Tracking and Tracking
stablestates. The goal of this state is to follow the USV.
(a) The first state of the FOLLOW phase isTracking,
which represents the UAV’s final approach above the
USV’s deck to the tracking altitude.
(b) When the UAV is above the deck at a predefined
altitude, the state machine passes toTracking stable
and waits for the appropriate conditions for landing
whiletheUAVistrackingtheUSV.Theseconditions
are the distance threshold from the USV’s center in
the horizontal plane, the predicted trajectory of the
USV must be feasible for the UAV, and the estimated
USV’s position covariance must be in a predefined
limit. When all conditions for landing are met, the
state machine passes to the next phase.
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 7 of 18


--- PAGE 8 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat
4. LANDINGphaseiscomposedof Descent, Flare,and Landed
states.
(a) The Descent state represents the initial stage of the
landing maneuver in which the UAV starts descend-
ing towards the USV’s deck. If one of the landing
conditions is violated or the new measurements are
not received within a predefined time limit, the state
machine transitions to the stateTracking.
(b) The previous state passes to the stateFlare when the
UAV reaches a certain height above the USV’s deck.
This maneuver is similar to an airplane’s final stage
of landing approach in which UAV tries to match the
attitudewiththeUSV’sdeckinordertolandsmoothly
on all legs. The touchdown is verified by monitoring
the estimation of the needed thrust to maintain the
flightandverifiedusingaccelerometersandtherange
finder sensor. In case of missing the landing platform
and losing sight of the USV’s deck the UAV will
return to the phase FOLLOW. For these emergency
situations, the trajectory generator has the minimum
altitude set which prevents generating the trajectory
into the water.
(c) Aftertouchingdown,theUAV’smotorsareturnedoff
and the state machine passes to theLandedstate.
Bydividingthelandingproblemintosmallerindividualstates,
itispossibletocustomizetheMPC-basedtrajectorygenerationand
the reference passed to the MPC for each state of flight.
4.3. Trajectory generation
TheMPC-basedtrajectorygenerationaimstocreatereferences
for the UAV based on the UAV’s flight phase. In the first phase
of the UAV’s operation (NAVIGATION), a point reference in the
approachaltitude ℎ𝑎 anddirectlyabovethecurrentUAV’sposition
is used. Moreover, the UAV’s heading reference is adjusted, such
that the camera on the UAV aims towards the USV’s location. The
predicted x, y coordinates of the USV are used for theApproach
state. Hence, the trajectory from the MPC ensures that the control
leads the UAV’s position in such a way that the UAV performs an
approachtotheUSV’spositionatagivenapproachaltitude ℎ𝑎 and
heading ℎ directing towards the USV. Due to this, the camera can
be mounted on the drone under a certain angle, enabling efficient
use of the camera’s FOV. For the FOLLOW phase, the predicted
velocityoftheUSVisaddedtothereference.TheUAVisthusable
to follow the moving USV, maintaining the predefined altitudeℎ𝑡.
During a descent maneuver, the reference is a trajectory gen-
erated by sampling the z-position to maintain a specific vertical
approachvelocityrelativetotheUSV’sdeck.Additionally,averti-
cal velocity reference is established to maintain a constant mutual
vertical speed. The visualization of such obtained guided path can
beseeninFigure4a.Throughouttheflaremaneuver,thepredicted
position, linear velocity, attitude angles, and Euler rates of the
USV’s deck are supplied to theMPC optimization (see Figure 4b)
to create a trajectory that minimizes both position and attitude
deviation upon the touchdown. Thanks to the continuous creation
of the trajectory, the UAV can react to the latest USV state.
However, even when tracking all USV states during the final
flare maneuver, it does not guarantee a smooth touchdown regard-
ingattitudealignment.ItisbecauseofthefactthattheUAV’shori-
zontal acceleration is controlled by tilting, and therefore, change
in roll and pitch angle influences the velocity and the position
of the UAV, which is also demanded to be tracked as precisely
as possible. To address this challenge, we propose a method that
(a) The visualization in Rviz illustrates the
creation of the guiding path for the MPC-
based trajectory generator, depicting the be-
ginning of the landing maneuver.
Full-state
reference
LMPC
optimization
Lin. model
𝐱new=𝐀𝐱prev.+𝐁𝐮
UAV’s state of flight𝑚
USV’s predictions𝐩𝑑
UAV’s
odometry
𝑒
𝐬𝑟
generated
trajectory
𝐫𝑑, ℎ𝑑
𝐮
(b) Diagram of the trajectory generator, where the UAV’s
flight state comes from the state machine and 𝐬𝑟 is a
modified full-state reference of the size of the prediction
horizon that the MPC tracks. The MPC’s output is a
sequence of action interventions𝐮, which are fed one by one
into the linear model and from which the desired trajectory
(𝐫𝑑, ℎ𝑑) is created.
Figure 4: Visualization of the landing maneuver in Rviz
together with the trajectory generator pipeline diagram.
dynamically changes penalization matrix𝐐[𝑡] from (29) to get the
most precise tracking of the certain states such as attitude angles
uponthetouchdown.Forthispurpose,weintroduceanexponential
function
𝑓 (𝑣𝑑) = 1 + 𝛼
𝑒𝛽𝑣𝑑
(33)
that is used to change the elements of the penalization matrix𝐐[𝑡],
specifically roll and pitch angles. This function depends on the
vertical distance 𝑣𝑑 between the UAV and the USV’s deck. The
coefficients 𝛼 and 𝛽 are tuned to increase the value of the specific
elements of the 𝐐[𝑡] in sufficient distance to have time for the
attitudesynchronizationmaneuver,whichwecallForcingAttitude
Alignment (FAA). This can be done only when the approach
velocity is constant, which was already achieved by adjusting
the reference vertical speed, as mentioned above. As the UAV
approaches the deck, the𝐐[𝑡]’s matrix weights belonging to the
attitude angles exponentially increase, resulting in prioritizing the
correctionofattitudedeviationsoverothertrackedUSV’sstates.It
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 8 of 18


--- PAGE 9 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat
Mission
and navigation
Onboard
sensors
Trajectory
generator
States prediction
State estimator
Trajectory tracking
controller
Attitude rate
controller IMU
UAV
actuators
Onboard
sensors
State
estimator
Odometry &
localization
𝑚
trajectory reference
𝐫𝑑
ℎ𝑑
𝝎𝑑
𝑇𝑑
𝐚𝑑
𝝉𝑑
≈1 kHz
𝐱, 𝐑, 𝝎(100 Hz)
PWM
𝐑, 𝝎
𝐞
𝐩𝑑
𝐞
UAV
USV states
USV
Figure 5: Full system pipeline diagram including USV’s estimation/prediction, mission planning, trajectory planning, and the
Multi-robot Systems multirotor control system Baca et al. (2021).Mission and navigation software supplies the flight mode (𝑚)
to the Trajectory generator where the reference trajectory composed of headings and positions (𝐫𝑑, ℎ𝑑) is generated.Trajectory
tracking controller ensures the trajectory is precisely tracked by producing the desired thrust and angular velocities (𝑇𝑑, 𝝎𝑑) for
the Pixhawk embedded flight controller. TheState estimator fuses data from Onboard sensors and Odometry & localization
methods to create an estimate of the UAV translation and rotation (𝐱, 𝐑). Estimated states (𝐞) and a full-states prediction (𝐩𝑑)
of the USV are provided by theState estimator and States prediction software, which exploits theOnboard sensors of the UAV
and USV.
is also noteworthy that aligning the attitude is advantageous even
when landing on a rapidly moving USV.
In the final stage of the MPC-based trajectory generator the
MPC’s output is not used directly, instead the trajectory is com-
puted using angular rates of the individual motor obtained from
MPC and UAV’s linear model. The generated trajectory serves
as the tracking trajectory for theReference tracker in Multi-robot
Systems (MRS) system Baca, Hert, Loianno, Saska and Kumar
(2018).Agraphicalrepresentationofthetrajectorygeneratorinter-
connectionintotheMRSUAVcontrolsystemisshowninFigure5.
5. SIMULATION VERIFICATION
The integration of the proposed method into the MRS system
Baca et al. (2021); Hert, Baca, Petracek, Kratky, Penicka, Spurny,
Petrlik, Vrba, Zaitlik, Stoudek et al. (2023) enabled realistic veri-
fication in a simulated environment, which allowed us to test the
system under various conditions and even in high wind. The MRS
system estimates the wind-based forces and deflections, which are
then corrected by the attitude rate controller. As shown in Table 2,
the most probable waves have a height between1.25 mand 2.5 m.
Therefore, we primarily focused on designing the overall system
using the proposed method to efficiently land the UAV on the
USV located inModerate sea. In the first simulation experiment,
the USV is left uncontrolled, drifting with the water current in
Subsection 5.4. Then, the USV is following a predefined path in
Subsection 5.5. Lastly, the proposed approach was compared to
the most related state-of-the-art approach Gupta et al. (2022) in
Subsection 5.6.
5.1. Simulation Environment
The proposed approach was thoroughly tested in a simulation
with highly realistic waves that was inspired by the project called
Virtual RobotX (VRX) Bingham, Agüero, McCarrin, Klamo,
Malia, Allen, Lum, Rawson and Waqar (2019), which was created
for the maritime VRX Competition. The designation of the waves
together with their heights is denoted in Table 2. It is also worth
mentioning that the height of the waves also correlates with wind
speed, as shown in (Abujoub, 2019, p. 13). However, the wind is
omitted in the simulations. The simulation environment based on
Table 2
Definition of sea state codes Bishop and Price (1974). Notice
that the percentage probability for Calm and Smooth seas are
summed up. The table is a modified version of the one from
(Fossen, 2011, p. 200).
m Percentage probability%
Description
of sea
Wave
height
observed
World
wide
North
Atlantic
Northern
North
Atlantic
Calm1 0
11.2486 8.3103 6.0616 Calm2 0–0.1
Smooth3 0.1–0.5
Slight 0.5–1.25 31.6851 28.1996 21.5683
Moderate 1.25–2.5 40.1944 42.0273 40.9915
Rough 2.5–4.0 12.8005 15.4435 21.2383
Very rough 4.0–6.0 3.0253 4.2938 7.0101
High 6.0–9.0 0.9263 1.4968 2.6931
Very high 9.0–14.0 0.1190 0.2263 0.4346
Phenomenal Over 14.0 0.0009 0.0016 0.0035
- (1) glassy, (2) rippled, (3) wavelets
theMRSGazebosimulation 1wascreated(seeFigure6).TheUAV,
which was used in simulations, weights3.5 kg, is0.15 min height
andthearmlengthis 0.325 m.TheUSVis 5 mlong, 2.5 minwidth,
1.3 m in height and weights around180 kg. Its landing platform,
whichmeasures 2.5 minlengthand 1.7 minwidth,iscoveredwith
the AprilTag with a side length of1 m. The USV is equipped with
an engine mounted on a joint at the back of each float, allowing
it to navigate through predefined waypoints using a simple PID
controller.
Water motion is modeled using the summation of Gerstner
wavesthatrepresentthewatersurfaceasatrochoidalshapeTessendorf
(2001). This allows to adjust the amplitude, period, direction, and
steepness of the waves. The horizontal and vertical displacements
of the wave-field to the undisturbed horizontal location 𝐱0 =
[𝑥0, 𝑦0]⊤ with a vertical height of𝜁0 = 0 are defined as
𝐱(𝐱0, 𝑡) = 𝐱0 −
𝑁𝑤∑
𝑖=1
𝑞𝑖(𝒗𝑖∕𝑣𝑖)𝐴𝑖 sin (𝒗𝑖𝐱0 − 𝜔𝑤𝑖 𝑡 + 𝜙𝑖), (34)
1https://github.com/ctu-mrs/mrs_uav_gazebo_simulation
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 9 of 18


--- PAGE 10 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat
(a) An image from the down-facing cam-
era mounted on the UAV.
(b) Screenshot from the Gazebo simu-
lator depicting a UAV above the USV’s
deck during the landing maneuver.
(c) Detail of the landed UAV on the
USV’s deck.
Figure 6: Screenshots from the Gazebo simulator during the UAV’s landing maneuver onModerate sea.
𝜁(𝐱0, 𝑡) =
𝑁∑
𝑖=1
𝐴𝑖 cos (𝒗𝑖𝐱0 − 𝜔𝑤𝑖 𝑡 + 𝜙𝑖). (35)
Each wave component is defined with steepness𝑞𝑖, amplitude𝐴𝑖,
angular frequency 𝜔𝑤𝑖, random phase 𝜙𝑖, and wave vector𝒗𝑖 in
the direction of travel with the magnitude of𝑣𝑖. The𝑁𝑤 in (34) is
the number of wave components at time𝑡. In our case, three wave
components 𝑁𝑤 were used to simulate an offshore environment. It
is also worth mentioning that waves with a steepness greater than
1:7 (wave height to wavelength) are considered breaking waves,
which means that they are breaking at their crest Toffoli, Babanin,
Onorato and Waseda (2010). Therefore, the nonbreaking waves
can have a maximum inclination of around25◦. We assume that
the UAV together with the USV will not be operated in worse
conditions for safety reasons. This implies that the UAV’s landing
maneuver won’t be performed in such conditions.
5.2. USV state estimation and prediction
The core component of the state estimation and prediction
systemistheKalmanfilter,whichfusesdatafrommultiplesensors
toincreasethemethod’sreliability.Thesystemusesamathematical
modeloftheUSVinthepredictionstep,whichcanprovidetempo-
raryestimatesevenifnonewsensorydataarereceivedforalimited
time. The accuracy of predicted states depends on the accuracy of
the USV model (see Section 3) and the correctness of its defining
parameters, which specify the USV’s properties. The potential
imprecision of the model identification impacts the prediction of
the USV states used by the trajectory generator, which can lead
to an imprecise landing. The predicted USV states are position
[̂𝑏𝑥, ̂𝑏𝑦, ̂𝑏𝑧]⊤,attitude [𝜙𝑏, 𝜃𝑏, 𝜓𝑏]⊤,linearvelocity [𝑢𝑏, 𝑣𝑏, 𝑤𝑏]⊤,and
Euler rates[𝑝𝑏, 𝑞𝑏, 𝑟𝑏]⊤.
The state estimation system relies on mutual communication,
sharing the GNSS location and IMU data. For precise localization
during the FOLLOW and LANDING phases, visual relative lo-
calization is employed using the AprilTag detector and UVDAR
system,and eventheGNSSinformation canbeutilizedin extreme
cases in these operational phases. Additionally, an IMU is em-
ployed for the attitude and angular velocity estimation. This phase
heavily relies on the precision and noise levels of sensory mea-
surements. Extensive verification of the used sensors, as detailed
inNovaketal.(2024),indicatesthattheAprilTagdetectordelivers
thelowesterrorinpositionandlinearvelocityestimation,whereas
the IMU excels in attitude and Euler rates estimation. According
to Novak et al. (2024), the estimation performance measured with
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) underModerate sea conditions
oftheusedestimationsystemisfollowing.PositionRMSEisequal
to 0.116 m, attitude RMSE is0.017 rad , linear velocity RMSE is
0.201 m s−1 and angular velocity RMSE is0.004 rad s−1 .
Table 3
Trajectory generator settings and limits for trajectory state
machine.
Symbol Value Description
ℎ𝑎 15 m approach altitude
ℎ𝑡 7 m tracking altitude
𝑣𝑙𝑎 1 m s−1 landing approach velocity
𝑣𝑓 𝑎 0.5 m s−1 flare approach velocity
5.3. MPC-based trajectory generation settings
The configuration of the MPC-based trajectory generator is
based on the attributes of the employed UAV and our practical
experiences. However, this does not limit our method to a specific
type of UAV, as the UAV model presented in Section 3 was
described in a general manner and therefore the mathematical
model can be tailored to a specific UAV.
We summarize the most important parameters of our method,
suchasthealtitudeforapproachstateorverticalvelocityinlanding
state in Table 3. These parameters were obtained empirically and
can be changed dynamically at any time during the flight. We also
put constraints on both the linear and angular velocities based on
the limitations of the Reference tracker, as shown in the block
diagram in Figure 5. These limits are listed in Table 4. These
parameters can be adjusted according to the used UAV. However,
it must be noted that if the limits are too low, the UAV may
never perform a landing maneuver in harsh sea conditions. This is
becausetheUSV’smovementsmaynotbeachievablebytheUAV.
It was experimentally found that the maximum speed of the
USV on which is our method capable of successfully landing is
7 m s−1 in Calm sea environment. On the other hand, the same
speed of the USV is not achievable in harsh sea conditions due
to the acceleration limitations within which the state estimator is
capable of providing an accurate estimation.
Another important parameter of the proposed method is the
lengthofthegeneratedtrajectory.Inthiswork,weuse 2 sprediction
horizon with 20 prediction steps. The length of the trajectory was
determined based on the computation complexity. Our analysis
showed that the trajectory generator can operate at a maximum
frequency of 10 Hz, allowing sufficient time for the solver to
converge in the NAVIGATION phase. During the FOLLOW and
LANDING phases, the operation rate increases to50 Hzsince the
solution is found within a maximum of20 ms. The inconsistent
computationtimeishandledbytheMRSsystemtrajectorytracker,
which performs the interpolation of the given trajectory to find the
correcttimeandstatetofollowandwhichensuressmoothtracking
of a given trajectory.
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 10 of 18


--- PAGE 11 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat
Table 4
Maximal allowed constraints for UAV model in trajectory generator to generate landing trajectories for the UAV and penalization
matrices used in the objective function.
Symbol Value Description
𝐑 *blkdiag[0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1] control input weighting matrix
𝐐 *blkdiag[30, 30, 40 + 10000
𝑒20𝑑 , 1 + 50000
𝑒10𝑑 , 1 + 50000
𝑒10𝑑 , 50, 1, 1, 3000 + 3000
𝑒25𝑑 , 1, 1, 1] state weighting matrix
𝐏 *blkdiag[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] final state weighting matrix
𝜙, 𝜃 ±0.7854 rad roll and pitch min/max angle
𝑣𝑥, 𝑣 𝑦 ±8 m s−1 horizontal velocity in x and y axis
𝑣𝑧 ±4 m s−1 vertical min/max velocity
𝑣𝜙, 𝑣 𝜃, 𝑣 𝜓 ±2 rad s−1 roll, pitch and yaw rotation velocity
* blkdiag denotes block diagonal matrix
5.4. Landing on a USV carried by current
In the first set of experiments, the USV was located on a
Moderate seaandwaspassivelycarriedbythewatercurrent,which
is a typical situation in many UAV-USV scenarios. Empirical
findingsindicatethatsettingtheGerstnerwave’speakamplitudeto
0.5 mand the period to5 sresulted in waves with heights ranging
from 0.6 mto 2.8 min simulation. The position and heading were
randomlygeneratedwithinapredefinedrangefortheexperiments.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
-10
-9
-8
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
-3
-2
-1
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
-2
0
2
4
6
8
(a) Horizontal and vertical reference tracking.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
-0.1
0
0.1
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
-0.1
0
0.1
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
0
0.5
1
(b) UAV’s attitude alignment upon the touchdown.
Figure 7: Comparison of the MPC-based trajectory generator
with FAA at the final pre-touchdown maneuver and without
FAA in simulation. The vertical yellow line indicates a touch-
down.
TherecordedmotionoftheUSVwasemployedtofine-tunethe
𝛼 and 𝛽 coefficients from (33) for MPC-based trajectory generator
using FAA. The comparison of MPC-based trajectory generator
with and without FAA is demonstrated in Figure 7. The graphs
show the UAV’s horizontal and vertical position together with
attitude-tracking reference and performed tracking of the UAV
during the simulated landing maneuver. The trajectory generated
by the MPC-based trajectory generator utilizing FAA ensured
synchronization of attitude angles at the touchdown. In contrast,
the MPC-based trajectory generator without FAA does not assure
thissynchronization.Ifwecomparepositionprecisionwhileusing
FAA, the performed position deteriorated only1 cm in the x-axis
and 1.5 cminthey-axis.ThisdemonstratesthattheFAAapproach
ensures better synchronization of the UAV’s and USV’s attitude
angles upon the touchdown without any apparent deterioration in
position precision.
Our approach was tested repeatably in realistic real-world en-
vironmentsimulations.ThetakeoffpositionoftheUAVwasplaced
randomly,alwaysatleast 40 mawayfromtheUSV.Thetrajectories
of both the UAV and USV from one of the experimental trials
are depicted in Figure 8. The graphs show that the UAV ascended
from the initial altitudeIdleto the approach altitude. It then began
approachingtheUSV’spositionattime 11 sandcontinuedthrough
all flight states, which are detailed in Subsection 4.2. The landing
maneuverstartedattime 29 sandlastedapproximately 6 suntilthe
Flare state began. The touchdown was performed at time35.5 s.
This shows that the proposed method is capable of generating
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
-3
-2
-1
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
-30
-20
-10
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
5
10
15
Figure 8: Comparison of the UAV and USV positions together
with the state machine states during one of the experiments on
Moderate sea. The vertical yellow line indicates a touchdown.
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 11 of 18


--- PAGE 12 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
 (d)
 (e)
Figure 9: The assessment of the 100 UAV’s touchdowns on USV’s deck located inModerate sea conditions using normal
distribution analysis for evaluation of the (a) position deviation (0.15, 0.092), (b) horizontal velocity deviation (0.36, 0.252),
(c) roll deviation (0.23, 2.852), (d) pitch deviation (−0.32, 2.302) and (e) yaw deviation (−0.05, 0.992) during touchdown.
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
 (d)
 (e)
Figure 10: The results from 100 UAV touchdowns performed when the USV was following a path onSlight/Moderate sea. (a)
Position deviation  (0.44, 0.162), (b) horizontal velocity deviation (0.41, 0.262), (c) roll deviation (−0.14, 2.212), (d) pitch
deviation  (0.59, 3.322) and yaw deviation (−0.02, 1.052) during touchdown.
trajectories that enable a fast approach and landing. Moreover, we
show that our approach is able to land quickly within 6 seconds in
waves with a height up to2.5 mand on an inclined USV’s deck.
To demonstrate the reliability of our method, we ran 100
randomly initiated landing tests. The accuracy of the landing is
of the utmost importance, as it must be accurate in order to land
successfully within the landing zone of the size of a roughly
2 m x 2 m deck. A significant roll or pitch deviation between the
USV and UAV can result in overturning the UAV, leading to
potential damage and, thus, unsuccessful landing. On the other
hand,maintainingtheimpactvelocitywithincertainlimitsinorder
to prevent a strong impact with the USV’s deck is crucial.
Statistical results evaluating the touchdown’s precision, with
normal distribution analysis, are depicted in Figure 9. The errors
in position during the touchdown are shown in Figure 9a. The
maximum displacement recorded in one of the one hundred ex-
periments was0.5 m, which is still considered as safe landing. All
other experiments ended with a displacement smaller than0.35 m.
The impact speed of the UAV into the USV’s deck (see Figure 9b)
is within limits for safe landing. The calculated velocity smaller
than zero is caused by the inaccurate detection of the landing
when the approach speed is close to zero. In91 % of the landing
experiments, the roll angle deviation was within ±5◦, and the
pitch angle deviation did not exceed4◦ in 90 %of cases as shown
in Figure 9c and in Figure 9d. Yaw angle control demonstrated
high accuracy, with deviations exceeding two degrees only three
times during all touchdowns (see Figure 9e). Therefore, it is worth
mentioning that the yaw angle outlier at4.75◦ was most likely
caused by the USV, which slightly rotated the UAV before the
touchdown was detected.
5.5. USV following predefined path
The proposed method was designed to be able to plan landing
trajectories such that the USV is not forced to stop or suspend
its current task. Due to the increased complexity of landing on a
movingboat,thesimulatedenvironmentconditionsweremitigated
to Slight sea and Moderate sea levels. Consequently, the average
wave height was around1.25 m.
One of the experiments in which the USV followed a square-
shaped path at a speed of around2 m s−1 is shown in Figure 11.
The indicated velocity of the USV is for information only because
itwasmeasuredunder Calm seaconditions.However,inthetested
sea conditions, the speed fluctuated due to the influence of waves.
The experiment started with the UAV approximately90 m away
fromtheUSV.TheUAVwasabletocatchupwiththeUSVattime
32 sandbegandescendingintothe Followphase.At 38 s,ascanbe
seenfromtheattachedFigure11,theUSVchangeditsdirectionof
motion. Nevertheless, all conditions for landing were met and the
landing maneuver started almost immediately, continuing into the
Flarestate. The UAV landed at45 s.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
-80
-60
-40
-20
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
5
10
15
Figure 11: Comparison of the UAV and USV positions together
with the state machine states, while the boat was following a
predefined path at a speed of2 m s−1. The vertical yellow line
indicates a touchdown.
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 12 of 18


--- PAGE 13 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat
(a) Illustration of the touchdown’s po-
sitions.
(b) Vertical touchdown velocities dur-
ing the landing.
(c) Landing maneuver duration.
(d) Roll deviation during the touch-
down.
(e) Pitch deviation during the touch-
down.
Figure 12: Comparison of the proposed MPC-FAA and MPC-NE methods in waves with a height of up to 2.5 m (Moderate sea).
Theaforementionedexperimentwasconducted100timeswith
100 % success rate to gather statistical results (see Figure 10),
showingslightlyworseresultscomparedtolandingonaUSVbeing
carried by the current (Subsection 5.4). The measured deviations
upontouchdownarehigherheredueto theincreasedaccelerations
experienced by the USV, resulting in a less accurate estimation
of the USV’s motions. The mean position error of touchdown
increasedfrom 15 cmto 0.44 m(seeFigure10a).Ontheotherhand,
themeanapproachvelocityincreasedonlyby 0.05 m s−1,ascanbe
seen in Figure 10b. The yaw’s deviation mean value ( Figure 10e)
isclosetozero,andmosttestsendedwithayawdeviationbetween
±2 degrees. However, values larger than2◦ also appeared, which
was caused by the fact that some landing attempts were performed
during the USV’s turning maneuver, where the USV’s yaw angle
estimation was lagging slightly behind. The ability to align the
roll and pitch angles upon the touchdown ensured that most of the
touchdown attempts ended up close to the demanded attitude (see
Figure 10c and Figure 10d, ensuring a safe touchdown.
5.6. Comparison with state of the art
According to our knowledge and based on the comprehensive
state-of-the-art study (for the summary, see Table 1), we found
as the most relevant work of Gupta et al. (2022). However, the
method MPC-NE in Gupta et al. (2022) utilizes only the AprilTag
measurementsfortheUSV’spositionestimationanddoesnotalign
theyawangleoftheUAVwiththeUSV’s.MPC-NEisnotcapable
of the initial approach to the USV’s position when the USV is not
in the FOV of the UAV’s camera. Therefore, the landing phase is
the only part of our method MPC-FAA that can be compared with
the state-of-the-art method MPC-NE.
More than one thousand simulations for each method were
done to obtain the statistical results. The primary focus of interest
while comparing both methods was the accuracy of the landing,
specifically,theprecisionofposition,attitude,andimpactvelocity.
Anothercrucialparameterthatwascomparedisthedurationofthe
landing maneuver itself.
5.6.1. Comparison of landing precision on Moderate
sea
We first compare MPC-FAA with MPC-NE in scenarios close
to Moderate seaconditions.Touchdownpositionsaccuracyofboth
methods shown in Figure 12a is fitted to the normal distribution,
which expresses the mean value of the distance from the center of
the landing platform (AprilTag) with the standard deviation. The
touchdown success rate of MPC-NE method was95 %, whereas
our method MPC-FAA showed 100 % success rate. Moreover,
MPC-FAAmethodachievedapositiondeviation3.5timessmaller
than MPC-NE method. The comparison of the vertical approach
velocity during the touchdown, shown in Figure 12b, displays that
the method MPC-FAA, unlike MPC-NE, ensured that the impact
velocity was not higher than1 m s−1.
The graph in Figure 12d shows that MPC-FAA and MPC-
NE methods were able to demonstrate accuracy in synchronizing
the UAV’s roll angle with the USV’s. Nevertheless, MPC-FAA
achieved a better standard deviation2.85◦ compared to MPC-NE
with 3.35◦. MPC-FAA outperformed MPC-NE with a 2 times
smaller standard deviation for the pitch angle deviation (see Fig-
ure 12e).
Out of the 95 successful landings achieved by MPC-NE, the
landing maneuver was performed within 60 s in all cases (see
Figure 12c). However, the average landing time was34 s, which is
2 times longer than what was achieved by MPC-FAA method. At
the same time, as shown in Figure 12a, our approach consistently
achieves a higher level of accuracy when landing inModerate sea
conditions.
5.6.2. Comparison of landing precision in varied sea
conditions
To comprehensively compare MPC-FAA method and MPC-
NE method in different conditions, we selected 10 different en-
vironment setups that cover a wide range of possible offshore
conditions. The simulated scenarios differ in wave amplitude and
period, such that the simulatedsea varied fromCalm sea to Rough
sea (see Table 2). Both MPC-FAA and MPC-NE methods were
testedforeveryscenarioonehundredtimes.Theresultsareshown
in (Figure 13 – Figure 14), where the x-axis labels represent
the wave amplitude and period used in simulated scenarios, as
described in Subsection 5.1.
The comparison of the touchdown position precision is shown
inFigure13a.Accordingtothisgraph,MPC-FAAachievedamean
touchdown position closer to the center of the USV’s deck across
all tested scenarios when compared to MPC-NE. Our method’s
largestaveragepositiondeviation( 37 cm)occurredinachallenging
scenariowithamplitude 0.8 mandaperiodof 8 s,wherethewaves
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 13 of 18


--- PAGE 14 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat
Rough seaModerate seaSlight sea
(a) Landing precision as a distance from landing pad center.
Rough seaModerate seaSlight sea
(b) Landing maneuver duration.
Figure 13: Comparison of landing maneuver precision and
landing duration of the proposed MPC-FAA method and state-
of-the-art MPC-NE approach across individual scenario setups.
Rough seaModerate seaSlight sea
(a) Number of unsuccessful landings from 100 runs.
Rough seaModerate seaSlight sea
(b) Touchdown velocity during the landing.
Figure 14: Comparison of the number of unsuccessful landings
and touchdown velocity during the landing across individual
scenario setups of the proposed method MPC-FAA and state-
of-the-art MPC-NE approach.
reached 5 m in height. On the other hand, MPC-NE has the worst
touchdown precision when the wave’s amplitude was set to0.6 m
and the period to6 s. The worst position deviation of MPC-NE is
mostprobablyduetothefactthatthemethodneglectstheswayand
surge movements while the waves affect the USV’s motion in both
vertical and horizontal directions.
Figure 13b compares the average duration of the landing ma-
neuvers. Thanks to MPC-FAA method’s ability to use estimation
of the USV’s movements before the UAV reached its position, it
was ensured that the landing was, on average, 2 times faster than
MPC-NEmethod.ThemethodMPC-NEneedslongerobservation
of the USV’s movements for the purpose of identifying the waves.
Moreover,duetoneglectingsurgeandswaymovements,UAVmay
lose sight of the AprilTag, which leads to a termination of the
landingmaneuver.BasedonthedatapresentedinFigure13b,most
landing interruptions of our method occurred in a scenario where
theamplitudeofthewaveswas 0.8 mandtheperiodwas 5 s.Insuch
a scenario, our method had an average landing duration of around
45 s.However,therewasnosignificantincreaseinthelandingtime
for the method MPC-NE.
Bothmethodsachievedalowunsuccessrateoftouchdowns,as
can be seen in Figure 14a. MPC-FAA method failed only 5 times,
while MPC-NE method failed 30 times. The comparison of the
vertical approach velocity (see Figure 14b) shows that MPC-FAA
method is consistent over all tested scenarios. On the other hand,
MPC-NE method ensured a softer landing in scenarios without
waves but a more aggressive and dangerous landing in high-wave
scenarios. Overall, the proposed method MPC-FAA outperformed
MPC-NE in almost every aspect compared and showed that the
MPC-FAA is reliable in various sea conditions up toRough sea
(wave height 4 m).
6. REAL-WORLD EXPERIMENTS
The real-world experiments were conducted in freshwater
reservoirs, so to induce conditions similar to those tested in the
simulation,itwasnecessarytocreateartificialwaves.Thisensures
the repeatability of the experiments over a long time horizon,
regardless of the weather, which is responsible for creating the
wavesontheopenwaters.Thelightweightinflatablemockupofthe
USVwithalandingdeckwasusedforeasymanipulation,allowing
for the creation of artificial waves with different amplitudes and
frequencies.
6.1. UAV and USV platforms
TheUAVwasbuiltusingtheTarotT650framewithBrushless
Direct Current Tarot 4114 320KV motors and Turnigy Multistar
51A Electronic Speed Controllers. The UAV was equipped with a
Pixhawk 4 autopilot with Global Positioning System (GPS), and
powered by a LiPo 6S8000 mAh battery. The proposed method
runs onboard, together with the rest of the autonomy stack, on
NUC8i7BEH high-level computer with an i7 8559U processor,
16GB of DDR4 RAM, and a 500GB SSD. The details of the UAV
platform are in Hert, , Baca, Petracek, Kratky, Spurny, Petrlik,
Vrba,Zaitlik,Stoudek,Walteretal.(2022),however,somemodifi-
cations were needed due to the UAV’s above-water operation. The
UAV was equipped with the RealSense D435 camera for detec-
tion of the AprilTag. Furthermore, the mvBlueFOX MLC200wG
camera was used to observe the UltraViolet (UV) Light-Emitting
Diodes (LEDs) that are placed on the USV’s deck. The UAV was
equipped with floats on its legs, which ensures the UAV can float
in case it lands on the water surface. All electronic components
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 14 of 18


--- PAGE 15 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
(d)
 (e)
 (f)
Figure 15: Captured photographs from real-world experiments showcasing the method from an initial approach until a precise
touchdown. The photos show (a) landing the UAV on the landing pad on land, (b) tracking a moving landing pad with the UAV
on land, (c) tracking the USV with the UAV in high wind, (d) tracking the USV with the UAV in high wind and artificial waves,
(e) tracking moving USV with the UAV, and (f) UAV successfully landed on the USV.https://youtu.be/7Cvdttz9ZZk
were also protected with a water-resistant spray and placed in the
3D-printed water-proofed cover.
For conducting the first experiments, the landing pad was
mounted on an inflatable raft towed behind a manned vessel. This
mockup, towed by the manned vessel, was later exchanged for
the unmanned USV (see Figure 15f). The landing platform was
designedintheshapeofasquarewithasidelengthof 2 m.TheBoat
unit, which contains a NUC8i7BEH computer, LiPo battery pack,
GPS, IMU units, and other electronics, was mounted on the top of
a deck. The landing area with a side length of80 cm was covered
withAprilTagsandequippedwithUVLEDsblinkingmarkerused
for relative localization of the USV from the UAV onboard using
AprilTag and UVDAR detectors.
It is also worth mentioning that even after a successful touch-
down,theUAVcanbeflippedordroppedfromtheUSV’sdeckdue
to the continuous movements of the USV in the waves. To ensure
that the UAV remains stable on the deck, the magnetic adhesion
device presented in Zhang et al. (2024) can be used to hold the
UAV after touchdown. Alternatively, a suitable solution based on
docking station Grlj, Krznar and Pranjić (2022) can be used.
6.2. Real-world landing on USV
The results from one of the complex real-world experiments
are shown in Figure 16, where the comparison of the UAV’s and
USV’s paths in a 2D plane is shown in Figure 16a. The initial
segment of the USV’s trajectory begins in shallow water near the
shore,whereweartificiallycreatederraticmovementstoverifythe
robustnessandprecisionofthetrackingpartofMPC-FAAmethod.
The USV is followed by the UAV at the tracking height, where the
mutual position isshown in Figure 16b andvelocity in Figure 16c.
The velocity was not constant to emulate the USV’s movements in
a wave environment, allowing us to validate the capability of our
method to track the USV even under varying speeds.
The transition to the LANDING phase was intentionally de-
layedtodemonstratethemethod’scapabilitytotrackreliablyUSV
evenwhileturning,thusthelandingstartedat 324 sfromtakeoff.In
theLANDINGphase,especiallyduringthetouchdownitself,align-
ingtheattitudeanglesiscrucial.Therefore,Figure16dillustratethe
differences between UAV’s and USV’s attitude angles focused on
Descentand Flarestates, where our system performs roll and pitch
alignment. In contrast, the heading alignment is carried out from
the FOLLOW phase, as shown in Figure 16e. The touchdown was
executed with a position deviation of approximately20 cmand an
attitude deviation smaller than2◦ in every axis.
The next experiment summarized in Figure 17 differs from
the previous one by the presence of wind with speed of7 km h−1,
wind gusts up to17 km h−1 but mainly due to the artificial waves.
The comparison of the UAV’s and USV’s positions over time is
shown in Figure 17a. In this experiment, the pilot controlled the
first 30 s of the flight to simulate real-world deployment, where
the drone is initially controlled by a different program, such as
in the motivation scenario, where an exploration planner is used
to search for garbage. Afterward, the landing algorithm is started
to land from the current location. The UAV was guided from its
initial position to the above-water surface. In the first 5 seconds
after initiating MPC-based trajectory generator, the UAV gained
an altitude ℎ𝑎 = 15 m and began an approach to the USV’s
position.WhentheUAVobtaineddatafromtheAprilTagdetection
system, the estimation of the USV’s z position was corrected. This
phenomenon,whichoccurredbetween55and60secondsfromthe
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 15 of 18


--- PAGE 16 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat
20 40 60 80 100 120-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
5
10
15
20
25
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
1
2
3
4
5
320 325 330 335
-2
0
2
4
6
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
0
50
100
150
(a)
(b) (d)
(c) (e)
Descent
Tracking stable
Figure 16: Evaluation of the USV following and landing on its deck. Individual graphs depict (a) UAV’s and USV’s path with
marked takeoff and touchdown positions, (b) position displacements between UAV and USV, (c) horizontal velocity together with
vertical approach velocity, (d) the difference between the roll and pitch of the UAV and USV duringDescent and Flare states, and
(e) yaw difference between UAV and USV.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
60
80
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
-20
0
20
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
0
5
10
15
(a) A comparison of the x,y, and z coordinates of the UAV and
USV.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
-5
0
5
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
-5
0
5
100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109
-10
0
10
(b) USV’s roll and pitch angles, and the difference between the
UAV’s and USV’s angles during the landing.
Figure 17: Evaluationofthereal-worldlandingexperimentwith
artificial waves. The vertical yellow line indicates a touchdown.
https://youtu.be/U29zBVzZ3sI
start,clearlyindicatesthatrelyingsolelyonGPSdataforestimating
theUSV’saltitudeisinsufficientandthattheestimatedaltitudecan
not be used for a safe landing. The conditions for the final landing
were met shortly after the tracking of the USV started.
Throughout the entire experiment, the USV was artificially
rocked, resulting in a maximum pitch angle of8◦ and minimum
roll angle of−6◦ (see Figure 17b). The LANDING phase lasted
approximately 8 sandwasconcludedwithasuccessfultouchdown
with attitude angles deviation lower than2◦ and position deviation
approximately 15 cm. The effectiveness of FAA in the reduction
of the difference between roll and pitch angles during the flare
maneuverisshowninFigure17c.Despitethesignificantdeviation
at the beginning of the Flare state, the increasing penalization of
theUAV’sattitudeeffectivelyreducesthisdeviationtoaminimum
untilthetimeoftouchdown.Duringtheseexperiments,weverified
that the proposed method can operate in a real-world environment
with almost identical behavior to that of simulations.
7. Conclusions
In this paper, we proposed a novel method for autonomous
trajectory generation of UAV landing on top of a moving and
rocking USV. The novel MPC-based trajectory generation relies
on the accurate estimation and prediction of USV states, along
withpreciseautonomouscontrolofaUAV.Thankstothedynamic
modification of the penalization matrices, the vertical approach
speed is reduced, and attitude angles are aligned with the USV to
decrease the impact of the UAV’s gear just before the touchdown.
The UAV can successfully land inModerate sea conditions or
even on Rough sea conditions when using our approach. MPC-
FAA achieved a reliability rate of 99.5 % in harsh conditions
in simulated cases, whereas the state-of-the-art approach had 6
times more unsuccessful touchdowns. Moreover, the results of the
proposed system indicate a substantial improvement in touchdown
accuracy, achieving approximately twice better precision while
also completing the landing maneuver50 % faster than MPC-NE
method. These outcomes highlight the efficiency of our approach
in comparison to existing techniques. Moreover, the MPC-based
trajectory generator for landing the UAV on the USV was verified
by conducting numerous real-world experiments.
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 16 of 18


--- PAGE 17 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat
References
Abujoub, S., 2019. Development of a landing period indicator and the use
of signal prediction to improve landing methodologies of autonomous
unmanned aerial vehicles on maritime vessels. Ph.D. thesis. Carleton
University.
Abujoub, S., McPhee, J., Irani, R.A., 2020. Methodologies for landing
autonomousaerialvehiclesonmaritimevessels. AerospaceScienceand
Technology 106, 106169.
Abujoub, S., McPhee, J., Westin, C., Irani, R.A., 2018. Unmanned Aerial
VehicleLandingonMaritimeVesselsusingSignalPredictionoftheShip
Motion, in: OCEANS 2018 MTS/IEEE Charleston, pp. 1–9.
Akib, A., Tasnim, F., Biswas, D., Hashem, M.B., Rahman, K., Bhattachar-
jee,A.,Fattah,S.A.,2019. UnmannedFloatingWasteCollectingRobot,
in:TENCON2019-2019IEEERegion10Conference(TENCON),pp.
2645–2650.
Baca, T., Hert, D., Loianno, G., Saska, M., Kumar, V., 2018. Model
Predictive Trajectory Tracking and Collision Avoidance for Reliable
OutdoorDeploymentofUnmannedAerialVehicles,in:2018IEEE/RSJ
IROS, pp. 6753–6760.
Baca,T.,Petrlik,M.,Vrba,M.,Spurny,V.,Penicka,R.,Hert,D.,Saska,M.,
2021. The MRS UAV System: Pushing the Frontiers of Reproducible
Research, Real-world Deployment, and Education with Autonomous
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems
102, 1–28.
Bingham, B., Agüero, C., McCarrin, M., Klamo, J., Malia, J., Allen, K.,
Lum, T., Rawson, M., Waqar, R., 2019. Toward maritime robotic
simulation in gazebo, in: OCEANS 2019 MTS/IEEE SEATTLE, IEEE.
pp. 1–10.
Bishop, R.E.D., Price, W.G., 1974. On modal analysis of ship strength.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. A. Mathematical and
Physical Sciences 341, 121–134.
da Cunha, A.E.C., 2015. Benchmark: Quadrotor Attitude Control., in:
ARCH@ CPSWeek, pp. 57–72.
DailyPicksandFlicks,2016. Dronecrashesintoboatandfallsintowaterdial.
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sQVoPzJOcZw&t=60s&ab_channel=
DailyPicksandFlicks. accesed in January 2024.
Ding, W., Huang, H., 2023. Research on dynamic landing guidance
algorithm for the maritime quadrotor. Ocean Engineering 271, 113775.
Doherty,P.,Rudol,P.,2007. AUAVSearchandRescueScenariowithHu-
man Body Detection and Geolocalization, in: Orgun, M.A., Thornton,
J. (Eds.), AI 2007: Advances in Artificial Intelligence, Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg. pp. 1–13.
Fortuna,J.,Ferreira,F.,Gomes,R.,Ferreira,S.,Sousa,J.,2013. Usinglow
costopensourceuavsformarinewildlifemonitoring-fieldreport. IFAC
Proceedings Volumes 46, 291–295.
Fossen, T.I., 2002. Marine control systems–guidance. navigation, and
control of ships, rigs and underwater vehicles. Marine Cybernetics,
Trondheim, Norway, Org. Number NO 985 195 005 MVA, www.
marinecybernetics. com, ISBN: 82 92356 00 2 .
Fossen, T.I., 2011. Handbook of marine craft hydrodynamics and motion
control. John Wiley & Sons.
García, C.E., Prett, D.M., Morari, M., 1989. Model predictive control:
Theory and practice—A survey. Automatica 25, 335–348.
Grlj,C.G.,Krznar,N.,Pranjić,M.,2022. Adecadeofuavdockingstations:
A brief overview of mobile and fixed landing platforms. Drones 6.
Gupta, P.M., Pairet, E., Nascimento, T., Saska, M., 2022. Landing a uav in
harsh winds and turbulent open waters. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters 8, 744–751.
Hert, D., , Baca, T., Petracek, P., Kratky, V., Spurny, V., Petrlik, M., Vrba,
M.,Zaitlik,D.,Stoudek,P.,Walter,V.,etal.,2022. MRSModularUAV
HardwarePlatformsforSupportingResearchinReal-WorldOutdoorand
Indoor Environments, in: 2022 IEEE ICUAS, pp. 1264–1273.
Hert,D.,Baca,T.,Petracek,P.,Kratky,V.,Penicka,R.,Spurny,V.,Petrlik,
M., Vrba, M., Zaitlik, D., Stoudek, P., et al., 2023. Mrs drone: A mod-
ular platform for real-world deployment of aerial multi-robot systems.
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems 108, 64.
Jalón, M., 2014. Non-linear Attitude Control and Guidance of a Quadrotor
UAV. Master’s thesis. Lisboa, Técnico.
Junaid, A.B., Konoiko, A., Zweiri, Y., Sahinkaya, M.N., Seneviratne, L.,
2017. Autonomous wireless self-charging for multi-rotor unmanned
aerial vehicles. Energies 10.
Kalman, R.E., 1960. A new approach to linear filtering and prediction
problems. Journal of Basic Engineering 82, 35–45.
Keller,A.,Ben-Moshe,B.,2022. ARobustandAccurateLandingMethod-
ology for Drones on Moving Targets. Drones 6.
Li, N., Huang, H., Wang, X., Yuan, B., Liu, Y., Xu, S., 2022. Detection of
floating garbage on water surface based on pc-net. Sustainability 14.
Meng, Y., Wang, W., Han, H., Ban, J., 2019. A visual/inertial integrated
landingguidancemethodforuavlandingontheship. AerospaceScience
and Technology 85, 474–480.
Ngo, T.D., Sultan, C., 2014. Nonlinear helicopter and ship models for
predictive control of ship landing operations, in: AIAA Guidance, Nav-
igation, and Control Conference, p. 1298.
Novak, F., Baca, T., Prochazka, O., Saska, M., 2024. State estimation of
marine vessels affected by waves by unmanned aerial vehicles. URL:
https://mrs.fel.cvut.cz/data/papers/2024_Novak.pdf.AccessedinJune
2024.
Novák, F., Báča, T., Saska, M., 2024. Collaborative object manipulation
on the water surface by a uav-usv team using tethers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.08580 .
Olson, E., 2011. AprilTag: A robust and flexible visual fiducial system,
in: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 3400–3407.
Paris,A.,Lopez,B.T.,How,J.P.,2020. Dynamiclandingofanautonomous
quadrotor on a moving platform in turbulent wind conditions, in: 2020
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
IEEE. pp. 9577–9583.
Persson, L., Wahlberg, B., 2019. Model predictive control for autonomous
ship landing in a search and rescue scenario, in: AIAA Scitech 2019
Forum, p. 1169.
Polvara, R., Sharma, S., Wan, J., Manning, A., Sutton, R., 2018. Vision-
Based Autonomous Landing of a Quadrotor on the Perturbed Deck of
an Unmanned Surface Vehicle. Drones 2.
Raffo, G.V., Ortega, M.G., Rubio, F.R., 2010. An integral predictive/non-
linear 𝐻∞ control structure for a quadrotor helicopter. Automatica 46,
29–39.
Rawlings, J., 2000. Tutorial overview of model predictive control. IEEE
Control Systems Magazine 20, 38–52.
Reis, J., Batista, P., Oliveira, P., Silvestre, C., 2023. Discrete-time kalman
filter for heave motion estimation. Ocean Engineering 277, 114240.
Sharma, N., Saqib, M., Scully-Power, P., Blumenstein, M., 2022.
Sharkspotter: Shark detection with drones for human safety and envi-
ronmental protection. Humanity Driven AI: Productivity, Well-being,
Sustainability and Partnership , 223–237.
Stephenson, J., Duncan, N.T., Greeff, M., 2024. Distributed model pre-
dictive control for cooperative multirotor landing on uncrewed surface
vessel in waves. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10399 .
Stingl, A.L., 1970. Vtol aircraft flight system. US Patent 3,487,553.
Tessendorf, J., 2001. Simulating ocean water. Simulating nature: realistic
and interactive techniques. SIGGRAPH 1, 5.
Tian, E., Li, Y., Liao, Y., Cao, J., 2024. UAV-USV docking control system
based on motion compensation deck and attitude prediction. Ocean
Engineering 307, 118223.
Toffoli, A., Babanin, A., Onorato, M., Waseda, T., 2010. Maximum steep-
ness of oceanic waves: Field and laboratory experiments. Geophysical
Research Letters 37.
Venugopalan,T.K.,Taher,T.,Barbastathis,G.,2012. Autonomouslanding
of an unmanned aerial vehicle on an autonomous marine vehicle, in:
2012 Oceans, pp. 1–9.
Walter, V., Saska, M., Franchi, A., 2018. Fast mutual relative localization
of uavs using ultraviolet led markers, in: 2018 International Conference
on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), IEEE. pp. 1217–1226.
Wang,J.,Olson,E.,2016.Apriltag2:Efficientandrobustfiducialdetection,
in: 2016 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), IEEE. pp. 4193–4198.
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 17 of 18


--- PAGE 18 ---
Ocean Engineering. PREPRINT VERSION - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE. DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.119164
Model predictive control-based trajectory generation for agile landing of unmanned aerial vehicle on a moving boat
Xu, R., Liu, C., Cao, Z., Wang, Y., Qian, H., 2024. A manipulator-assisted
multiple uav landing system for usv subject to disturbance. Ocean
Engineering 299, 117306.
Xu, Z.C., Hu, B.B., Liu, B., Wang, X., Zhang, H.T., 2020. Vision-
basedAutonomousLandingofUnmannedAerialVehicleonaMotional
Unmanned Surface Vessel, in: 2020 39th Chinese Control Conference
(CCC), pp. 6845–6850.
Yang, L., Liu, Z., Wang, X., Wang, G., Hu, X., Xi, Y., 2021. Autonomous
Landing of a Rotor Unmanned Aerial Vehicle on a Boat Using Image-
Based Visual Servoing, in: 2021 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO), pp. 1848–1854.
Yang,Z.,Yu,X.,Dedman,S.,Rosso,M.,Zhu,J.,Yang,J.,Xia,Y.,Tian,Y.,
Zhang, G., Wang, J., 2022. Uav remote sensing applications in marine
monitoring: Knowledge visualization and review. Science of The Total
Environment 838, 155939.
Zhang, Y., Wu, Z., Wei, T., 2024. Precise landing on moving platform for
quadrotoruavviaextendeddisturbanceobserver. IEEETransactionson
Intelligent Vehicles , 1–10.
O. Prochazka et al.:Preprint submitted to Ocean Engineering Page 18 of 18